Topaz: The T-- dialect

    Author: "Gabriele Santilli"

===Introduction

The T-- dialect is the language used for the implementation of the lower
level layers of Topaz (for example, datatype actions). For this reason,
it is a rather low level, statically typed language.

===Action definitions

The list of standard actions defined for Topaz values is in the file
topaz/actions.topaz. The file contain, for each action, the action name
followed by the arguments specification block. The latter has the usual
syntax, with the exception that the first argument has no explicit type
checking (if provided, it is ignored). (Type of values that don't define
a specific action, will just cause an error if that action is invoked.)

---Internal actions

topaz/internal-actions.topaz defines additional actions that are used
internally by Topaz but are not exposed to users.

===Value properties

Each type of value defines a list of properties that are internally available
for those values. These properties have "lower level" types which are only
available within T--.

The property types available within T-- are:

    int! (64 bit integer value)
    i32! (32 bit integer value)
    i16! (16 bit integer value)
    flt! (IEEE floating point value)
    chr! (single Unicode character)
    bit! (true or false)
    byt! (unsigned 8 bit integer value)

There are also composite types:

    val! (Topaz value - has a type and properties depending on the type)
    array of x (a sequence of values of type x)
    map from x to y (a data structure that maps values of type x into values of type y)

str! is an alias for "array of chr!", while bin! is an alias for "array of byt!".
Please note that composite types are mutable.

For example, the block! type defines its properties as:

    properties: [
        values: array of val!
        pos:    int!
    ]

===Value makers

Types have a "maker" function that is responsible for constructing a value
(ie. appropriately initializing its properties). MAKE only takes two
arguments (type and "specification"), while makers may take any number
of arguments; thus the rule for matching the specification to the maker
arguments are as follows:

*If the maker takes no arguments, then the specification is simply ignored.

*If the maker takes exactly one argument, the specification is passed as is.

*If the maker takes more than one argument, the specification must be a block,
and its values are passed to the maker in order.

Makers return a block containing pairs of set-words and expressions; these
are used to initialize the properties of the new value being constructed.

===Standard actions

The actions block in the type definition lists all the action functions
for values of that type. The spec of each function has to match with how
the action has been defined in the action definitions (topaz/actions.topaz),
with the following accepted differences:

*The mandatory arguments may be renamed for the sake of readability (provided
there are no name clashes with the options of course).

*Optional arguments don't need to be specified as options (it really makes no
sense to).

*Except for the first argument (whose type is obviously going to be the one
being defined, or one based on it if the action hasn't been overridden), all
other arguments may specify a T-- type instead of the original type in the
action definition, provided there is a conversion defined from the type(s)
in the action definition to the one used in the actual function.

Remember that, since T-- is statically typed, you cannot specify multiple
types for an argument. If the action definition accepts multiple types,
you can either use val! and then use switch-type to act based on the type
(or, simply use actions on that value so that there is a dynamic dispatch),
or use a type for which there is a conversion for all the provided types.

It is also possible for the type-specific action to be more restrictive
in the types than the action definition, in which case an error is caused
if an unsupported type is passed; it is however preferable to act in a way
that makes sense rather than causing an error. (The stress being on "that makes
sense" - don't surprise users, don't do things that may cause subtle bugs, etc.)

===T-- "native" functions

These are the functions which are predefined in T--:

    to: [
        "Convert a value to a different type"
        type "A T-- type name (can't be a composite)"
        value "A T-- value or a val!"

        ; if value is a val!, the conversion function defined for its type
        ; are used
    ]
    make: [
        "Create a new val! value"
        type "A Topaz type name, or a val!"
        spec

        ; if type is a Topaz type name, the respective maker is invoked and passed
        ; the arguments in the spec.
        ; if it is a val!, it is cloned, and the clone is changed according to the
        ; spec
    ]
    switch-type: [
        "Evaluate code depending on value's Topaz type"
        value
        cases "Literal block of cases"
    ]
    length-of: [
        "Return length of array"
        array "T-- array"
    ]
    reduce: [
        "Create a T-- array"
        expressions "Literal block of T-- expressions"

        ; all expressions need to have the same type
    ]
    switch-symbol: [
        "Evaluate code depending on Topaz symbol ID"
        symbol-id
        cases "Literal block of cases"
        default "Literal block with default action"
    ]
    either: [
        "Evaluate code based on condition"
        condition
        true-block "Literal block with true action"
        false-block "Literal block with false action"
    ]
    if: [
        "Evaluate code if condition is true"
        condition
        code "Literal block with code"
    ]
    ; (maybe min and max should not be "natives")
    min: [
        "Return minimum of two values"
        val1
        val2

        ; values must be of same type, there are no implicit conversions
        ; no composites
    ]
    max: [
        "Return maximum of two values"
        val1
        val2
        
        ; see notes above
    ]
    shift-array: [
        "Move values to the right in an array in order to make space"
        array
        starting-position "Move the value at this position and the ones which follow"
        amount "Amount to move by"

        ; eg. shift-array [1 2 3 4] 2 1 -> [1 2 _ 3 4]
    ]
    for: [
        "Generic loop function"
        init "Literal block of initialization"
        condition "Loop as long as this condition is true (literal block)"
        increment "Literal block with code to do after each iteration"
        code "Literal block of code"
    ]
    join-array: [
        "Join the values of an array into a string"
        array
        separator "String to put between each value"
        name "Name of each value in the code block"
        code "Literal block of code to convert each value to a string"
    ]
